Wasn't this singing so rich this morning?
How powerful.
Well, if you'll hold tight there with me in second Corinthians 11, we plan to pick up this morning in verse 16.
And I intended to get farther, but we will Lord willing make our way through verse 21.
Cancer is something that has affected all of our lives.
And we know how deadly cancer can be, which is why we take it so serious, which is why we do the best that we can to avoid it in any way that we can so help through healthy diet and exercise, rest, eliminating anxiety, watching our bodies and the symptoms of it to catch it early when detected.
We know that the right treatment is crucial and to do so immediately.
And what we see in life and in 2 Corinthians and in many of the New Testament letters is that sin in and of itself is a cancer.
It's a cancer and we see it in Galatians chapter 5 where the Judaizers make their way back into the church as these Christians have now come under the lordship of Christ.
They are serving their king
And now these Judaizers are trying to bring them back under Jewish circumcision and Jewish ceremonial law and dietary laws in order to be saved.
And Paul says this in Galatians 5, 9, a little 11, 11s, the whole law.
What happened?
You were running so well.
And now you're being hindered from grace.
We see in 1 Corinthians chapter 5 verse 9, a completely different situation in Corinth when immorality is beginning to plague this church.
And Paul to them as well said, a little leavens, what?
The whole lump.
It eats its way through.
The title of my sermon today is a cancer in the church.
A cancer in the church.
We've watched these false teachers continue
to try to devour with their deception this church that Paul had bled for, sweat over, cried over, prayed for, labored for.
They have undermined Paul and his apostolic authority.
They are gloating in themselves and they have won over some, if not a sizable portion of the church.
If you look with me in chapter 11, verses 16 through 21,
Just in six verses in this section, we have two words that are dominating this section.
The word full is used five times and the word boast is used six times.
Now, if you hear a word once, it's important.
If you hear it that many times, the repetition magnifies the emphasis on these two words, full and boast.
I want you to see this morning, two realities regarding our response
both the frauds and to fools among professing believers.
Number one, in verses 16 through 18, we will note defending yourself before fools, the wind and the howl of defending yourself before fools.
Number two, in verses 19 through 22, though we'll stop at verse 21, I want you to see secondly, exposing fools as frauds.
the who and the how.
As we read through Proverbs 26, one through 12 earlier, did you not hear fool over and over and the punch that it brings when you consider such folly?
Look with me number one, defending yourself before fools, when and why.
This is the situation Paul has been put in.
Look with me in verse 16.
Paul says, I repeat,
Let no one think me foolish."
There it is.
But even if you do accept me or receive me, the King James says, as a fool, so that I too may boast a little.
We are entering into now what scholars call Paul's famous full speech, the full speech.
The word fool is used six times in 1 Corinthians,
More so in the context of describing how God counts and even uses what the world sees as foolish for his own purposes.
We read earlier and we'll return to shortly.
First Corinthians 4 where Paul uses such biting sarcasm in order to reveal their foolishness.
And so he does now in this full speech once again.
Look with me in verse 16, this word fool used six times in this chapter, mostly right here in the passage before us, twice more in the next chapter.
Paul is dealing with fools.
And he doesn't want the church to consider him foolish, but if they will, at least they'll put up with him as much and in the way that he's already putting, they're putting up with true fools.
Paul uses this word fool to say that he does not want to enter
this foolish controversy among these false teachers.
In other words, he's saying, I do not want to play your game.
I do not want to adopt your ways.
I will not be put on an equal playing field with you.
I will not engage you as equals.
And because the church refuses to defend Paul and receive his apostolic ministry, Paul is put in a position of doing something that normally he wouldn't do and normally one shouldn't do.
He enters the arena of engagement with fools.
And I believe that we see much and learn much through it.
As we've already seen in we'll see in chapter 12 verse 11,
The church is refusing to commend and receive Paul.
Therefore, he will speak and boast of his own credentials before God, his own authority, his own faithfulness.
And he says in chapter 12 verse six, if you'll turn over with me, because he speaks the truth, he may appear to be a fool and he may engage with fools, but he is not truly a fool.
And we'll notice as Paul has put in this very embarrassing situation of boasting of himself that he boasts vastly different than that of the fools.
The fools who commend themselves and Paul does so much differently.
It's ironic that surely the church will listen to Paul as he commends himself for good reason since they put up with fools and these false teachers
who do so for bad reason with foolish, underhanded motives.
Look with me in verse one in chapter 11 where this conversation really begins.
Paul is now picking up from when he said, I hope you will put up with me in a little foolishness.
Yes, please put up with me.
So he picks up now in verse 16, defending himself.
And it's not just about his character, it's not just about a personal vendetta that he has with others.
His apostolic ministry is hinging in the balance.
And if they do not receive his ministry, which comes with the authority of God, and instead they continue to entertain the ministry of wolves, then their sanctification, if not their salvation hangs,
in the balance.
Look with me in chapter 12 verse 5.
He says, on behalf of this man, I will boast, but on my own behalf, I will not boast, except of my weaknesses.
Though if I should wish to boast, I would not be a fool, or I would be speaking the truth, but I refrain from it so that no one may think more of me
then he sees in me or hears from me.
Paul said in chapter 10 that he will not boast beyond proper limits.
Do you ever hear someone boasting anything?
That's pretty big britches there, boy.
That's some big shoes to feel and certainly you can't feel them.
Paul says, God's given me an authority to build you up, not to tear you down.
And I will use it humbly ever so I may, but I will assert it
when your good depends on it.
Not to exalt himself, but to point to the one whom he represents.
Look with me in chapter 11, verse 16, he says, so accept me or receive me.
It could mean hear me out, endure listening to me, put up with me just for a moment, just for a moment.
Humor me if you will.
Look with me in verse 17.
He says, what I am saying with this boastful confidence that which is perceived as boasting, I say not as the Lord or after the Lord or literally it could read according to or in accordance with the Lord would, but as a fool.
We've seen this, this sort of phrasing, not from the Lord, not as the Lord,
Anything, what is Paul doing?
He's going quite off script.
Is he speaking against the Lord?
Is he now admitting freely that this is not inspired scripture, but his own opinion?
Are there verses in the Bible where Paul speaks for himself?
And it doesn't come with the authority of God and the answers, of course not.
Paul says in 1 Corinthians 7, 12, something very similar.
And he says that in the matter in 1 Corinthians 7,
The Lord gave no direct command.
He didn't quote something on that particular matter.
But nonetheless, Paul, under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, does speak in accordance with the full counsel of God in the mind of Christ.
In the situation before us, this boasting of himself, this entering into a debate with fools, Paul is doing so reluctantly.
He is doing so humbly.
And he says in chapter 12, verse 11, you forced me to it, I never wanted to.
Ordinarily, brothers and sisters in Christ, we do not engage with those who prove to be truly fools.
And it's very clear that Paul will not interact with them in a sinful manner.
What he's saying is that this is not the paradigm for Godly ministry, but he does so
because the circumstances of a fallen world call for it.
One scholar said, it's as if they ate so long at the table of fools that they couldn't digest the normal diet of saints.
I wanna talk to you in a way that normally people would interact with one another.
But because I obviously can't do that and you are entertaining fools and becoming fools yourself, we'll do this the hard way.
We'll do this in a way in accordance that normally we wouldn't do it.
I love how Matthew Henry explained it.
He said, though not contrary to the Lord, it wasn't the Lord's normal commendation for his followers to praise and vindicate themselves.
but rather to obeys themselves.
And yet the circumstances before us prudence would call for such an approach in such a circumstance.
And so he does.
Look with me in verse 18, he says, since many boasts are rejoiced are glory according to the flesh, according to the carnal ways of this world, according
to our sinful hearts to show off our own glory and to showcase ourselves.
He says, if many are going to do that, then I'll tell you what, you forced me to it, I'll boast.
And if anyone had anything to boast about, the Apostle Paul could rightly boast without even sinning.
2 Corinthians 10, 12 said, listen, we have put away our carnal ways
Don't regard anyone according to the flesh.
Don't look at people like that.
Don't look at people with the same lens that this world uses to size people up and judge them for good or for bad.
Don't use external appearances.
Don't use worldly standards.
We've put that away.
And it's so clear that these false teachers, we saw in chapter five, verse 12, they were boasting, but they were boasting about outward appearances.
They were boasting about the worldly credentials.
They'll go on and Paul will reveal that they're boasting about their worldly pedigree, their worldly resumes.
They're boasting in such a way that they want to put their best foot forward, yet they don't have a single good feet.
to them.
They want to show themselves and showcase themselves for something that they are not for their own glory.
Friends, what a reminder.
People love to brag on themselves, don't they?
If you want to get someone talking but you don't know how to engage in the conversation, here's a good rule of thumb.
Just ask them about themselves because naturally we love to talk about ourselves, don't we?
Matter of fact, for some people, every conversation always finds a way to hook one back to themselves.
And how much more carnal people love to brag about how much they have.
Love to brag about who they know to name drop their connections.
Love to brag about what they've done.
Love to brag about how much they know.
Love to brag about how they look.
Love to brag about what they can do.
Even if in a sort of humble brag, as if it were supposed to be put forth in a humble way.
Oh, it's so hard.
being this smart.
And you know, you don't understand how difficult it is being this good looking, do you?
You just don't understand how hard it is to be as awesome as me.
And yeah, much boasting amounts to little less than that.
Our flash loves to be petted.
And we love to put it out there for other people.
And Paul calls this business in this church of trying to impress and basically what they're trying to do is play a game of what I would call trying to out self-congratulate one another.
They are trying to out self-congratulate one another
And Paul does not want to enter into that with his rivals.
He makes very clear throughout 2 Corinthians, this is how we boast, and this is how we should boast.
Chapter 1 verse 12, with simplicity and a sincerity of conscience by the grace of God.
He boasted the evidence of God's grace.
and the church.
He boasted the church and how God's working in her and his hope for her.
He boasts of his divine calling and authority to build up the church, not tear it down.
Paul boasts in chapter 11 and 12 of his weaknesses because that shows that it's really Christ and not Paul.
Paul was not arrogant, but Paul makes very clear in this passage.
He was, however, confident.
And there is a very fine line between arrogance and confidence.
And Paul makes very clear that he is confident, but his confidence is in the new covenant ministry of Jesus Christ.
His confidence is not in himself.
His confidence is in the work of God and his grace and all of his covenant promises.
And that he is confident.
He puts no confidence
and the flesh, you wake up and all of the things that you said last Sunday, you were not going to do.
And all of the things you said that you were going to do, and by Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, all of it's frayed.
And so he doesn't want to boast, but since they do, he goes on to boast and he'll lay these out in chapter 11 and everything that crucifies sin, everything that promotes holiness,
He'll lay out his litany of sufferings for the church.
They boast to exalt themselves, our boast and how I humble myself to receive nothing from you, but to lay down my life for you.
And he doesn't even want to do that.
In chapter 12, they boast probably of their mystical experiences.
In the coming weeks, we'll see where Paul literally went to heaven.
And he didn't write a book about it.
And he didn't get a,
a deal for it.
And he didn't even really want to talk about it, but because he was pressed in order to show that he was so much more than they, he briefly mentions it and then moves on.
He'll boast of his weaknesses and trials that magnify Christ in his life.
He'll boast in chapter 12, verse 12 of his mighty works, but only because they show the stamp of God on his apostolic calling.
And in all of this, look with me in chapter 12.
In chapter 12, verse seven, even when Paul was boasting, not wanting to being forced into it, but not doing it in a sinful way, he says to keep me from becoming conceited.
Look at me, God has a way of humbling you, doesn't he?
Oh, I think you're doing so well there, huh?
Doing right, fine without me, aren't you?
Let you stumble for a moment.
Not because God is judging us, but because God wants to teach us as he gives us confidence that we cannot even walk without holding his hand as the old hymn says.
And sometimes we begin to get misplaced confidence in our flesh instead of Christ.
Boy, the church seems to be boasting.
Not only the false teachers, as Brian read earlier, the church is boasting.
Everybody is mighty, fine, proud of themselves.
Boy, it seems like this is a church full of what we had many years ago.
A lot of people who are determined to win the most spiritual person of the year award, and Paul says, this is so foolish.
Turn back with me to 1 Corinthians 4, verse 7.
He'll go on and he'll say, of all of this boasting, how can you boast so much in yourself?
Oh, you're so wise.
You were, you're so rich.
You pride yourself in all of your little petty pedigrees.
We'll come back to this passage often.
But he says, why, what do you have that you did not receive?
If then you received it, why do you boast as if you did not receive it?
Ladies and gentlemen, everything that you have is a gift from God.
Everything that you are is a gift from God.
Everything that you can do is a gift from God.
So why do we boast as those who have not received from his hand everything that we have and can so quickly be taken away just as easily as it was given?
So praise and boast in His holy name.
The only boast that we have is in what God made us, what God has done for us, what God is doing, what God will do and in knowing God.
If there is any claim to fame for the Christian, the only claim that we have to fame is that we know Jesus Christ and that we want to humbly
serve Him for His glory, not our own.
And in pressing this point, I want you to see the second one, which is the point in this section, exposing fools as frauds.
Exposing fools as frauds, the who and the how.
As we walk through this, I want you to know five dangers very practically.
that we need to consider first of all as we check within our own souls.
And secondly, I believe these five dangers present a grid to use in the discernment of other people.
Look with me in verse 19, danger number one, one who is wise in his own eyes, wise in his own eyes.
For you gladly bear
put up with tolerate with fools being wise yourselves.
Ladies and gentlemen, this is some of the most biting sarcasm in all of the Bible.
It would be rivaled by what we've seen in 1 Corinthians chapter four, and it is some of the most scathing sarcasm
used by the Apostle Paul.
Sarcasm certainly has a place in the Christian life.
And Paul brings it out as heavy artillery in this particular situation.
Do you know sarcastic people in your life?
There's a good chance you're one of them.
And you can relate to what he's doing here, but I wanna caution us
as we consider the use of this, which is appropriate in some situations, as a general rule of thumb, this tactic is typically not to be used for new believers and less mature believers who are not ready to wield such a tool as this.
This is a tool that Paul uses wisely, he uses humbly,
He uses sparingly and he uses very, very purposefully.
And in using this tool of sarcasm, he uses it in order to expose and counteract these walls in order to take the blinders off the sheep in order to edify them, not to tear them down and to promote their truth and maturity in Jesus Christ.
Look at what Paul says.
He calls them so wise.
Calvin says, with great applause, they put up with these fools.
It's clearly sarcasm because he indicates that they count and even pride themselves on being so wise when clearly the evidence shows just the contrary and the logic does not follow.
This church has such a severe lapse of judgment, and they are acting just the opposite.
And they need to remember that God is going to destroy the wisdom of the wise.
1 Corinthians 1.
And everything that appears to be so wise, God will expose it for the foolishness that it truly is.
And so in what sense did the church put up with, verses 19 and 20, or tolerate
this nonsense, they're listening to it.
They're influenced by it.
They are condoning it.
They are walking in accordance with these frauds as they have their own way.
And Paul is basically saying this, counting themselves wise, they show themselves to be fools because they are putting up with those who are truly fools who count themselves to be wise.
1 Corinthians 3, 18 says, let no one deceive himself.
If anyone among you thinks that he is wise in this age, let him become a fool that he might become wise.
For the wisdom of this world is folly with God, for it is written, he catches the wise in their craftiness.
And again, the Lord knows the thoughts of the wise that they are futile.
Let no one boast in men, which is exactly what they are doing.
James chapter three is very clear, if you want to have a nose for what is truly wise and what is truly foolish, look at the fruit or the children of that which comes from it.
James chapter three verses 13 through 18 says, the fruit of wisdom is this.
It produces that which is pure and peaceable.
and gentle and open to reason and full of mercy and good fruits and impartial and sincere.
And it produces a harvest of righteousness.
But if you want to expose the fraud for who he is as a fool, look in the wake of such profess wisdom.
And among true foolishness, what you'll find is bitter jealousy, selfish ambition, boasting,
Everything that is earthly, unspiritual, and he even says demonic.
And we just saw the demonic influence that Paul points to in this church in chapter 11.
He'll cry out in 1 Corinthians, is there no one truly wise among you to settle disputes?
He's already warned them in 1 Corinthians, chapter eight, your knowledge is puffing you up.
which is exactly the problem pointed to here.
He made clear in 1 Corinthians 13, this knowledge should produce love.
Turn back with me to 1 Corinthians 4.
I believe he picks up this conversation as we make our way back there again, 1 Corinthians chapter four verse eight.
Skating sarcasm.
He says, already you have all you want.
Already you have become rich, without us, without our ministry, without the work of God in your life, you have become kings.
And would you, and would that you did reign so that we might share the reign with you?
Verse 10, he says, we are fools for Christ's sake, but you are wise in Christ are so you think.
In other words, what Paul is saying, we might put it this way,
You are nothing but full of yourself.
You are full of yourself.
It's been wisely said that a man who is full of himself makes for a pretty small bundle because all that he is is being filled with pride and insecurity.
It's little man syndrome.
You know you're nothing, so you have to pretend to be something and nobody's fooled by it.
Scripture warns against those who exalt themselves saying that God will humble them, but those whom humble themselves, God will exalt.
Did you know that Proverbs has a lot to say about the person who is wise in his own eyes?
In other words, the person who just thinks they know it all.
Have you ever talked with someone and you're like, buddy,
And nobody gonna teach you nothing because you already know everything, don't you?
You already know everything.
Some of you aren't grinning.
I hope that's not you.
Listen to what Proverbs says.
Proverbs 12, 15, the way of a fool is right in his own eyes, but a wise man, listen children, listens to advice.
Do you know a person that is so full of themselves and thinks they know everything that they could never hear a word of instruction or correction to anyone else from anyone else?
Let me help you.
Go back and meet your 12-year-old or 15-year-old self, amen?
18-year-old, 20-year-old, 22-year-old, 25-year-old, how many of you would be honest and look back and think, man, I thought I knew it all.
And I thought that I had proved that the dumbest people in the world were my parents until I lived a little bit of life and realized just how foolish I really was.
Proverbs 26.5 says, Do you see a man who is wise in his own eyes?
There is more hope for a fool than for him.
Verse 16,
Chapter 28 verse 11, a rich man is wise in his own eyes, but a poor man who has understanding will find him out.
I have found often nobody at all in mind in our church right now, but I have found often when people so-called, pull me aside or call me, it won't my counsel.
Oh, huh.
I know what that means.
I've run this play before.
They don't really want my counsel.
They want to tell me what they think and then make me think that.
Maybe you can relate.
Proverbs 28, 26, whoever trusts in his own mind is a fool, but he who walks in wisdom will be delivered.
Oh, world, please listen, this world is more full of fools than I think it ever has been.
The Apostle Paul is abiding by what we studied last Wednesday night.
Ecclesiastes 7-5, it is better for a man to hear the rebuke of the wise than to hear the song of fools.
Children, please listen to me.
Don't be a fool.
Proverbs is so clear about who a fool is.
Proverbs 1-7 says, the fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge, both fools despise
wisdom and instruction.
You can't teach them anything.
Proverbs 10, 14, the wise lay up knowledge, but the mouth of a fool brings ruin near.
That is what these false teachers are doing.
Proverbs 10, 17, whoever he's instruction is on the path to life, but he who rejects reproof leads others astray.
It's a contagion.
And finally, Proverbs 10, 21 says, the lips
of the righteous feed many, but fools die for lack of sense.
I believe what scripture commends is the old acronym that goes by the word fat.
I believe what scripture commends is that would be faithful.
I believe the people who are influential and respectful or available, and I believe we ought to be
teachable.
Can someone teach you something?
Are you correctable?
I want you to look with me at the danger that we see next, number two, and verse 20.
Not only one wise in his own eyes, but one willingly exploited by frauds.
Five phrases piled one on top of the other to show that these parasites are eating through the church
and they're like leeches sucking everything that they can out of them and giving nothing back.
Listen to the sarcasm in verse 20, and oh, watch how this is fixing to get interesting.
For you bear it, you put up with it.
This is something you should not be tolerating or condoning.
If someone, here it is, first of all, if someone makes slaves of you, brings you into bondage, we don't know what that would have been.
But the word is used of enslaving someone, bringing them under their own thumb to promote their own glory.
In the book of Galatians, it's the matter of Judaizers who are trying to pull them back under the demands of circumcision and the ceremonial law in order to be saved.
As if to say, if you want to be right with God, you don't go through Jesus, you're Jewish, and you go through Jesus.
I believe in Corinth, we may be dealing with a different situation where they're enslaving this church to promote the false teachers on self glory.
Look with me at the second phrases he uses.
The phrase he uses, he, he next speaks of these parasites, these frauds.
that they're willingly accepted.
They exploit you.
It means they prey upon you.
They consume you.
They devour you.
They plunder you.
It could read they eat you out of house and home.
Any of you have teenagers?
One scholar put it this way.
They, to gather the fruit, they chop down the tree.
They plunder everything they can in the church to prop themselves up.
As Psalm 14, four says, you evil doers who eat up my people like bread.
This word is used in a variety of ways.
It's used literally of a wild animal who would ravenously eat another.
It's used to being eat up with zeal.
It's used of something that's eat up or destroyed, such as by fire.
It's used of wasting or eating up the resources of another, such as the prodigal son.
It's used of theft and robbery.
It's used of tearing up someone else.
Most likely, they're exploiting the resources of the church.
And ironically, Paul did just the opposite.
He said, I robbed other churches
so that I might serve you freely.
Galatians 5, 14 says, you shall love your neighbor as yourself, but listen, church, family, if you bite and devour one another, watch out that you are not consumed by one another.
Paul says in 2 Corinthians 7, we have exploited no one.
Look with me in verse 20.
He goes on and he says, you don't even realize it, but you're putting up with those.
And he says, takes advantage of you.
Or it could retakes from you such as your property.
It could also retakes you.
It's used of kidnapping.
It's also used of baiting such as a trap in order to trick someone into taking something.
They are taking advantage of you.
Does it not make your skin crawl and eat up your guts?
to watch someone begin to be taken advantage of and exploit it for their own personal gain, especially at the hands of tyrants.
And yet Paul says to take it even further, you willingly put up with this and you know better.
So how are they taking advantage of the church?
When you read 1 Corinthians 9, coupled with 2 Corinthians 11, and what we've seen in verses 7 through 12, it appears very likely that these false teachers are greedily taking from the church, financial compensation, and taking advantage of the church not to support them, but for their own gain.
And Paul says, I refuse to practice such underhanded, cunning ways.
He says, we've taken advantage of no one.
Brothers and sisters in Christ, is that our hearts in our homes, in our church, in our workplaces?
Can we honestly say with Paul, listen, we have sought to take advantage of no one in any way.
And when that is our hearts, we repent.
because Ezekiel 24 lays out a scathing indictment as the Lord condemns particularly the shepherds of Israel who fattened themselves at the expense of his people.
Jesus said of the religious leaders of his day, they love to sit in Moses's seat.
They love to be known and noticed.
And Paul says, I didn't burden nor deceive anyone or anything.
Friends, it is so hard to know in the world that we live in, who you can trust.
And these are some warning signs.
The check engine light is coming on.
Look with me in verse 20.
Fourthly, he says, they put on errors.
The word,
could be likened to a hot air balloon that lifts itself up into the sky.
In other words, these people put on airs.
They love to swagger.
They clearly think very highly of themselves.
Their head is in the clouds.
Their ego is larger than the planetary system.
Have you been there before and God brought it right back down?
Have you seen others walking with a swagger like that and you think, oh, buddy, please be careful because God will pop that hot air balloon really quick.
You see, they exalted themselves in order to humble the church.
Paul humbled himself in order to exalt the church.
Do you understand that these are characteristics that should apply to every aspect of our life?
the way that we handle ourselves with our spouses in marriage.
Can you ever be wrong?
Can you ever humble yourself?
Please, please stop elbowing your spouse right now, they hear it.
This is the attitude that we should have children toward your parents, toward our families and our church and our communities.
But I want you to see just how far this went
And what sin will get to when it's unchecked?
Look with me, if you will, please, to the last and fifth phrase in verse 20.
Not only when they make slaves of you, exploit you, take advantage of you, put on heirs, but Paul says next, slaps you in the face.
Things
have definitely escalated now.
What in the world is happening in this church?
Older translations say, smite you or strike you or hit you.
The word for slap is used of skinning an animal.
But more commonly it's used literally to beat someone.
Paul uses it in 1 Corinthians 926 when he speaks of not running as one aimless beating the air.
So what in the world is going on in this church?
Now it could be that Paul is referring metaphorically
to the way that they're treating them with this kind of language.
That's what it's like.
He could be referring to a sort of barrage of verbal attacks, a sort of verbal beatdown that they are inflicting on this church.
But in the most literal sense of the word, you can't help but wonder if this had gotten so tense
Tempers begin to flare.
And by the way, this is why 1 Timothy 3 says that an elder should not be one given to violence, but under control and gentle.
And that's something that should be emulated by everyone in the congregation to have yourself under control of the Holy Spirit.
Paul has already written that there's one in the church who pained him, who was punished by the majority, one who boasts and commends himself.
These tensions get so out of hand that sparks begin to fly, tempers begin to go off, pride begin to flare, and they literally broke out in a fist fight in the middle of the church.
I believe that is entirely possible.
And among Jews to slap someone just like among us with the back of the hand across the right cheek was one of the most humiliating acts.
Can you imagine the tempers getting to this point?
I can.
Ladies and gentlemen, because I have lived it.
When you begin to squeeze a lemon and put it under pressure, you begin to find out what's really in it.
And sometimes sin is exposed and repented of, and you see people who really love Christ, and other times, depravity is exposed, and then it's just even all the more persistent.
We are impressed by boasting.
We are attracted by confidence.
We are enthralled by strength.
And this church had become impressed with all of the wrong things.
In the book of Nehemiah, we saw literally where the Bible says Nehemiah had so gotten over their sin that he began to curse them, beat them and pull their hair out.
Can you imagine that?
Nick, we've had enough.
We're gonna call you down this morning and we're going to begin to rip his beard out of his face and beat him in front of the church.
Do you understand?
Can you visualize that?
Is it getting that bad?
Now in the book of Nehemiah as we studied that, I believe it's entirely possible, if not probable, that Nehemiah's not just unhinged, ripping people's hair out.
It could be a reference to the shaving of the head, which would produce shame.
It could be a beating that's in accordance with the Old Testament law of God.
But in this situation, you have people becoming unhinged.
Listen to me, if you wanna see people unhinged, you don't even have to go that far.
Just drive up 231, 730 on Monday morning.
If that don't do the job and you don't begin to see who people really are, try to go through Alabaster and Pelham to Birmingham in the morning or evening.
For some people, that's all it takes to see them completely lose their minds.
And Paul says in chapter one of Second Corinthians, not that we lord it over your faith, but we work with you for your joy, for you stand firm in your
I believe people have lost their minds today.
Just the other evening, we stopped in somewhere to get some ice cream and accidentally not pulled in the parking place quite far enough.
And buddy, she was very clear to let us know.
Very sorry, Karen.
Please go get back in your car and we will proceed on our way.
Paul says you need to repent and empty yourself.
I want you to see quickly, verse 21, very quickly, the third danger is one who is full of himself.
Look with me in verse 21, to my shame, I must say, we were too weak for that.
In other words, if you consider strength,
Putting up with fools like this, then you can rightly consider me weak.
Paul says, but whatever anyone else dares to boast of, I am speaking as a fool.
Not a fool truly, but it's one engaging with fools being perceived as one.
And he says, I also dare to boast, or I am bold to boast also in this.
The third danger is a person who's full of themselves.
And what we will see in the gospel, what we do see in Philippians chapter two is that Jesus Christ, who had all reason in the world to glory, he emptied himself, taking the form of a servant.
Jesus Christ, the Bible says in Isaiah,
gave his back to those who strike and his cheeks to those who pulled out his beard.
He literally endured the striking and beating and assaults of wicked men on our behalf.
Look with me fourthly and quickly and we'll pick up here Lord willing next time, but I want you to just get a taste
of the last two dangers.
Fourthly, one priding himself in empty pedigree.
He says, are they Hebrews?
Are they Israelites?
Are they offspring of Abraham?
Boy, they are really proud in their family line.
They can trace their ethnicity back to the beginning of God's people.
And Paul says to all of that, so am I.
You grew up in church.
You have all the right credentials.
You're a Jew.
You're a Hebrew of Hebrews.
Jesus says in John chapter 8, you claim Abraham as your father in all of the right Jewish pedigree, but I'm here to tell you that Satan is your father, not Abraham because you are acting just like him.
The Bible says not all who appear ethnically and outwardly to be of Israel, truly are Israel.
And we'll come back to that next time, but I want you quickly for the sake of the argument to see the fifth danger.
And the fifth danger is one who is out for his own gain.
Paul will use the rest of the chapter and he'll say, are they servants of Christ?
They belong to the right people, but they're nothing.
Are they servants of Christ?
I'm a better one.
I'm talking like a madman.
I don't want to do this.
And he lays out his boasting and his credentials is in the fact that daily he was being killed and giving up everything for the sake of the church.
Paul was enduring unbelievable offense and continuing to lay his life down for the church.
Some people today, someone looks at them the wrong way.
They miss a Sunday and no one calls them.
They get their feelings heard and they're gone.
Paul says, I have laid my life down to death daily.
I have crucified myself.
I am not out for my own gain.
How well can I prove this to you?
And ladies and gentlemen, that's who we are.
And ladies and gentlemen, that's what we do.
Because Jesus Christ laid down his life for us.
He was crucified and stapled to a tree on our behalf undergoing far worse offense than this.
And on the third day his humiliation turned into exaltation and he rose again from the grave and he reigns in glory.
And he gives us the endurance and strength that we need as we empty ourselves and as we are full of him to serve him.
Psalm 85, let me hear what God, the Lord will speak, for He will speak peace to His people.
Listen to His saints, but let them not turn back to folly.
Surely His salvation is near to those who fear Him, that glory may dwell
in our land.
Let us turn from our folly.
Let us not turn back to it, but turn to Jesus Christ and live.
Let's pray.
Father, we pray that you would strengthen your people, that you would fill us with yourself, and we pray that you would make your covenant promises clear,
and reel to us in a fresh way this morning.
The London Baptist Confession says, the supper of the Lord Jesus was instituted by him the same night he was betrayed.
It is to be observed in his churches to the end of the age as a perpetual remembrance and display of the sacrifice of himself and his death.
It is given for the confirmation of the faith of believers
and all the benefits of Christ's death, their spiritual nourishment and growth in Him, and their further engagement in and to all the duties they owe to Him.
The Supper is to be a bond and pledge of their communion with Christ and with each other.
As we come to the Supper this morning, emptied of ourself being renewed and filled with the newness of God,
I want to remind you that this story begins in the garden where Adam and Eve, particularly of a tree that brought death and disease and depravity on all of humanity.
And Jesus Christ was crucified on a tree to take all of our sin and all of our shame and to leave us with nothing but His covenant promises.
And as we partake, we long for, we look for the final tree at the end of Revelation in glory that will have leaves, that will blossom for the life and flourishing of the nations.
So Jesus says to his children this morning, turn from folly and come to me in E from my own hand.
I want to encourage you
in just a moment right now to consider your heart before God, any sin that the Lord may reveal, repent of it, turn from it and trust His grace in that.
As we come together, we renew our covenant together with one another.
We are one body in Christ and there ought to be no divisions between us.
We are fed with the tokens
of God's own fatherly hand, and we are strengthened and nourished, and we are pledging allegiance in a fresh way this morning to Jesus Christ.
Let's pray for God's help as we give Him thanks.
One Puritan prayed, God of all good, we bless you for the means of grace.
Teach us to see in them your loving purposes,
and the joy and strength of our souls.
You have prepared for us a feast, and we are unworthy to sit down as guests, but we wholly rest on the merits of Jesus and hide ourselves beneath this righteousness.
When we hear His tender invitation and see His wondrous grace, we cannot hesitate, but must come to you in love by your spirit in life and our faith, rightly to discern
and spiritually to apprehend the Savior.
While we gaze upon the emblems of our Savior's death, may we ponder why He died and hear Him say, I gave my life to purchasers, presented myself in offering to expiate your sin.
Shed my blood to blot out your guilt, open my side to make you clean, endure your curses to set you free, bore your condemnation to satisfy divine justice,
Oh, may I rightly grasp the breath and length of this design.
Draw near obey, extend the hand, take the bread, receive the cup, eat and drink, testify before all men that I do for myself gladly in faith.
Reverence and love receive my Lord to be the life, strength, nourishment, joy and delight.
And finally in the supper, we remember his eternal love.
boundless grace, infinite compassion, agony, cross redemption, and receive assurance of pardon, adoption, life, and glory as the outward elements nourish our body.
So may your indwelling spirit invigorate our souls until that day when we hunger and thirst no more and sit with Jesus at his heavenly feast.
Father, we pray that you would work in our hearts, exalt yourself, and that you would forgive and assure and strengthen your people.
We give you thanks for these elements.
And we pray that as signs and seals, tokens of your covenant promises, that you would bless your people and be united to us as we are to you more and more in Jesus' name, we pray.
Amen.